The Dorian Principle, a biblical response to the commercialization of Christianity by
Conley Owens, Chapter 11, The Scope of Ministry, Impunity vs. Jurisdiction.
One morning on the way to my high school, I was listening to the host of a radio show
recount the story of a woman who led a band of police officers on a high-speed chase.
Raising down the interstate, she eventually exited and led the authorities through a suburban
area.
Surprisingly, she neither crashed nor pulled over and surrendered.
Instead, she peeled into the driveway of her home and ran inside.
What is it that calls this woman to do this?
The radio host accepted answers from callers.
Did she have a medical emergency?
Did she need to use the bathroom?
The first caller answered correctly.
She believed she could not be arrested on her own property.
However, as the woman learned when the strong arm with the law forcibly entered her home,
that is not how police jurisdiction works.
Similarly, many imagine that within their own class of ministry, they may operate within
punity outside any kind of stipulations.
However, just as the Lord reigns over all the earth, the jurisdiction of the Dorian principle
extends to all gospel ministries.
In this chapter, I want to explore the boundaries of this jurisdiction in the context of the church.
Hopefully, by offering practical application, we will reify the ethic put forward in previous
chapters, but I also want to give it shape by attempting to sketch its limitations.
As we will be referring to this principle more frequently from here to the end of the book,
I'll restate our biblical ethic of ministry fundraising one more time before we continue.
In the context of gospel proclamation, accepting support as anything other than an active
co-labor compromises the sincerity of ministry.
Now let's embark on the journey of practical application.
Defining gospel ministry.
The Dorian principle begins with the phrase, and the context of gospel ministry.
Given that our stated principle looks to regulate the work of ministry, we must ask what
exactly ministry is, and how far its scope extends.
Some recent attempts to understand vocation in light of the Bible, bridge the secular
sacred divide between the work of ministers and laymen.
While such attempts may have some merit in seeing gods calling for all walks of life, this
blurring of distinctions can only provide confusion for our purposes of defining boundaries.
There must be some activities that are particularly ministry, and some that are discernibly not
ministry.
Otherwise, our principle would reject all commercial exchanges.
As it starting point, the Apostle Paul's concerns regarding ministry fundraising revolve around
the proclamation of the gospel, 1 Corinthians 918, 2 Corinthians 117.
We may therefore begin by qualifying our considerations, limiting them particularly
to gospel ministry.
In other words, the Dorian principle concerns the explicit proclamation of the word of God,
rather than other forms of charitable service, which may be too broad to warrant regulation.
However, we should pause given that Christ's command extends beyond preaching, including
miraculous healings among those things which should not be offered for price.
Matthew 108.
In context, the purpose of those miraculous healings is to demonstrate the veracity of the good news,
Matthew 107.
In here, the gospel is still in view.
Certain types of service, like miracle working, have such a relationship to that message that
while the gospel may be proclaimed apart from them, they cannot rightly exist, divorced
from the proclamation of the gospel.
For our purposes, gospel ministry is any activity that proclaims the gospel or directly attends
to its proclamation.
Though not immediately obvious, this includes all religious instruction.
From a biblical standpoint, the goal of any Christian teaching is not to stand on its own,
but ultimately to communicate the gospel.
1 Corinthians 2 2, Hebrews 6 1.
Consequently, the Dorian principle regulates teaching in many formats and contexts.
From sermons to books, both live and recorded formats line its purview.
From Sunday school to seminary, it governs contexts both within and outside the regular
operations of the church.
Accepting support.
The Dorian principle speaks of support and its acceptance.
Within the category of acceptance, we may define three modes, requirement, request, and
receipt.
Each forms a concentric circle within the other.
Those who require support are willing to request and receive it.
And those who request support are willing to receive it.
The Dorian principle forbids each one outside the context of co-labor, but identifies each
inner circle as more problematic than the proceeding.
Requirement
Just clear among the three, a minister cannot require support in exchange for ministry.
To hold ministry hostage for a ransom would make one a free agent rather than a servant
with the charge from his master.
Rather than requiring repayment, a godly minister should, like Paul, be willing to spend
and be spent 2 Corinthians 1215.
Beyond requiring payment, the Dorian principle prohibits requesting anything in exchange
for ministry.
Such a request implies a direct obligation to give an exchange for the service rendered.
Voluntary payment is still payment, not co-labor.
Receipt
Finally, ministers ought not to receive an exchange for ministry.
Many imagine that unsolicited gifts should be free from scrutiny, but even that which
is not requested may constitute reciprocity.
Of course, all these prohibitions hinge on the phrase in exchange for ministry.
That is, they only forbid reciprocity, not co-labor.
One may receive co-labor, even request it since a request is not imposed a direct obligation,
but appeals to divine obligation.
Additionally, one may even require co-labor for ministry, voluntarily abstaining from ministry
as determined by financial need.
For example, in Corinth, Paul refrained from full-time ministry and instead labored to support
himself.
When fellow evangelists from Macedonia arrived, presumably with financial relief, see a
Philippians 415, Paul resumed full-time ministry, Acts 185.
Jesus even commanded his disciples only to go where they would have support to do the
work of ministry, Matthew 1014.
And these circumstances, money is a means rather than an end.
Ministerial staff
Considering the Dorian principle in the life of the church gives us an opportunity to
evaluate how we think about weekly financial contributions.
First, the congregation ought not be misled about the nature of their giving.
Rather than being taught that they owe ministers directly, they should be taught that they owe
it to God to support his ministers, especially those from whom they have benefited.
Beyond this, they should understand that their giving is an act of co-labor.
In the words of Dei Carson, the church does not pay its ministers, rather it provides
them with resources so that they are able to serve freely.
The congregation works together with their ministers to ensure the gospel is proclaimed.
As such, it moves the charitable act from a negative center to a positive center, from
the cancelling of debt owed to investment in the kingdom of heaven.
Not only does a right understanding of giving correct the airing ethic, it has the power
to enliven the giver.
Of course, ministers also should recognize the nature of their income.
To quote another prominent theologian, Christian ministers should refuse remuneration for the
sake of the gospel.
When Christians accept money for ministry, they ought never view it as a wage but as a gift.
While the distinction between wage and gift might differ from our chosen vocabulary
of reciprocity and co-labor, the concerns coincide.
Cermans Naturally, preaching ministry should offer sermons
at no charge.
Few churches, if any, have a turnstile at the door, but it was not that long ago that many
charged purants.
Moreover, with the rise of technology, sermons have been sold in print in digital form for
some time.
As just one prominent example, an archive of Tim Keller's sermons currently costs $1,600
dollars, marked down from a list priced of $3,300.
In contrast to these commercial practices, the church should engage in the free proclamation
of the gospel, not only by permitting visitors to freely enter the building for worship services,
but also by providing any recordings freely.
These churches already practice this, sharing their sermons freely on sites such as Cerman
Audio.
Honorariums do not violate this ethic, but should be regarded as a fruitful means of supporting
interim preachers and teachers.
If the purpose of a church is to gather for the collective worship of God in the preaching
and hearing of the Word, the congregation and preacher work toward the same end.
ord by a mutual desire to properly honor God, a church provides an honorarium as an act
of co-labor.
If a regular preacher receives from his church in coordination with his labor is among them,
then a visiting preacher may do the same.
Thus, Peter was able to arrive at Corinth and receive financial support for his work there,
CF, 1 Corinthians 9-5.
Special Services
The irregular religious worship services warrant special scrutiny.
Any amount of religious instruction, including worship leading, should be offered without
pay.
Such charges are not unheard of in modern times.
For example, the church passed by the then president of the Southern Baptist Convention
charged for entry to their 2019 Good Friday worship service.
Frequently, special worship events run outside the context of the church, under the auspices
of a concert or conference.
Such affairs typically charge not only to recuperate physical costs, but also for religious
instruction.
Ticket sales that fail to identify the exact object of purchase, food, music, a message.
Along with a blurring between worship and entertainment, threatened to transgress the
Dwarriam Principle.
Our concerns regarding special services extend to weddings, funerals, and even counseling.
Unlike typical teaching or worship services, these tend to focus on a particular party,
the newly wedded, the family of the deceased, or the council.
And these circumstances, the needs of the few rise to the forefront, and an exchange of
money suggests that it is offered in return for the gospel ministry provided in that context.
Not only should churches in its ministers refrain from advertising a fee, they should also
not accept one.
As already stated, honorariums do not necessarily violate our stated principle, but where money
changes hands between one need of a service and one who provides it, is it clear that gospel
ministry is not being purchased?
Conceivably, one could give as an act of co-labor at a special service, but the context suggests
that any such money would constitute a direct payment.
Nothing apparent distinguishes a check-profer to a counseling pastor and a check-profer to
a secular therapist.
The ambiguity of the situation typically places the minister in a position where he cannot
discern the intent of the individual and accept money responsibly.
Such a minister ought to, like Paul, simply refuse funds and situations that suggest direct
repayment and look forward to accepting support in less compromising circumstances.
The importance of context As we've seen, context indicates
a financial exchange as reciprocity or co-labor.
For example, and the context of a church plant, Paul rejects current the infunds as reciprocity.
1 Corinthians 9-15, and the context of being sent out to other regions, he gladly receives
them.
1 Corinthians 16-6
Several aspects of context may indicate the nature of a contribution, but chief among
these are language and/or earmarking.
For example, using the language of co-labor, a ministry might advertise, "You've seen
our impact.
Please consider partnering with us."
By employing the terminology of partnership, this call to action indicates that any who
give join in laboring for the Lord, bringing their resources into a common pool for a common
purpose.
However, a ministry might solicit donations with a following appeal.
You've been afraid from our teaching, please consider giving back.
This language of reciprocity suggests a direct obligation to man rather than an indirect
obligation mediated by God.
Similarly, suggested donations offer a clever attempt at relieving one of the notion of obligation,
but almost certainly earmark a contribution as repayment.
Opposition and boycotts
The Dorian Principle stands at odds with much gospel proclamation as it exists in the world,
while inconsistency on this point may indicate false teaching.
True teachers also adopt compromised practices unaware of the implications.
Should we oppose a boycott such ministries to promote a biblical ethic?
Thankfully, the Apostle Paul gives a rather direct answer.
Observing that some preach Christ, not sincerely, he responds.
What then?
Only that in every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is proclaimed and in that
ivory choice, Philippians 1-18.
Along with Paul, we should rejoice at the gospel efforts of those who preach truly, but not
as sincerely as they ought.
And tanganistic pursuits such as boycotts are not only unnecessary, but largely unhelpful,
and it would be unwise to intentionally cut oneself off from the vast array of biblical
teaching offered at a cost.
Similar to boycotts, one may circumvent paywalls that restrict access to ministry, e.g., via
illicit downloads.
If the gospel is the Lord's to offer, and ministers are not permitted to sell their teaching,
such behavior may seem justified.
And considering the temple tax, Jesus offers a nuanced response to unjust financial
impositions attached to spiritual blessings.
What do you think, Simon?
From whom do the kings of the earth take toll or tax?
From their sons or from others?
And when he said from others, Jesus said to him, "Then the sons are free.
However, not to give offense to them, go to the sea and cast a hook and take the first
fish that comes up, and when you open its mouth, you will find a shekel.
Take that and give it to them for me and for yourself."
Matthew 17, 25b, 27.
Having a right to the benefits of the temple, the disciples do not owe the tax to those who
collect it.
However, for the sake of peace, it is often best to bear such burdens.
Conclusion
The Dorian Principle offers a foundation from which we can begin to concretize the New Testament
model of ministry fundraising.
In the next chapters, we will explore more specifics, beginning with the relationship
between the Dorian Principle and Paratured Church ministry.
End of chapter 11